# PortSpec

PortSpec is a tool to ensure all hosts in your network or under your control
have open ports that are up to the specification you set.

By setting a list of hosts and the ports you expect to be open, PortSpec will
run every predefined amount of time and scan these hosts for open TCP ports.
After all open ports are found, PortSpec will compare this list with the one
you defined, and it will alert you if something is not in spec.

Currently it is being under active development, and has very minimal
functionality, fit for a small particular purpose that it was developed for,
but hopefully some day it can work and have more features that will address
more needs.

## Configuration

PortSpec is configured solely by the `conf.yml` file. The path of this file
can be specified by the `-c` command line flag. So if you launch it with
`portspec -c /etc/portspec/portspec.yml`, it will read the configuration from
there. You can have multiple instances of PortSpec running with different
configuration files, in the same server, without issues.

The included `conf.yml` contains an example configuration file. Some of the
included options can be found here:

### interval

The `interval` setting controls how often (in seconds) should PortSpec scan
the hosts and report on the results. This clearly depends on your needs, but the
recommended values are 3600 (one hour) to 86400 (one day). Keep in mind that if
this value is too low, the previous scan may not finish before the new one
starts, but this usually happens if you have a large number of hosts, and this
is set to too low.

### ipv6

The `ipv6` setting is currently not implemented. However, when it is, if this
flag is `true`, it will also scan the IPv6 address of all hosts that are given
as a hostname (`example.com` vs `192.0.2.50`). This flag will default to `true`
very soon after the feature is implemented.

### parallelscans

The `parallelscans` setting is also not currently implemented. It will define
how many host scans should run in parallel. This is *host* scans and not *port*
scans, so adjust this value accordingly.

### hosts

The `hosts` setting is a list of hosts that will be scanned by PortSpec. It can
currently be either a domain name (`example.com`), an IPv4 Address
(`192.0.2.10`), or an IPv6 Address (`2001:db8::1337`). Each host needs to have
an array of ports that *SHOULD* be open. This list is the *expected* ports that
you want open, not the list of ports that will be scanned on this host. This
list can be empty, in case you expect no open TCP ports on this host.

An example of this configuration is:

```
hosts:
    "www.example.org":
        - 22
        - 80
        - 443
    "www.example.com":
        - 25
        - 587
    "example.net":
```

### scanports

The `scanports` setting is a list of ports that PortSpec will scan for in *all*
hosts. By default a pretty large list is included, but you can add and remove
ports as needed. Port ranges are currently not supported, but it is a feature
that is coming very soon.

## Alert Modules

Currently PortSpec supports mutliple modes of alerting the users. In this
section you can find configuration options for each implemented module.

### E-Mail

E-Mail is the most basic alert method and will cause PortSpec to send an e-mail
to a set of specified e-mail addresses. To configure e-mail, you will need to
add to the `conf.yml` the following:

#### sendemail

If you set `sendemail` to `true`, the e-mail alerts will be activated. Do not
include this or set this to `false`, and PortSpec will not send e-mail
notifications.

#### smtpserver

The `smtpserver` setting contains the address of the SMTP server to use for
outgoing e-mail. This can be a hostname (`smtp.example.com`), an IPv4 Address
(`192.0.2.10`), or an IPv6 Address (`2001:db8::1337`). Currently PortSpec
requires the server to support TLS in order to be able to login successfully.

#### smtpport

The `smtpport` setting is the port that PortSpec should contact the SMTP Server
at. The most common setting is `587`, but other options such as `2525` are also
possible.

#### smtpusername

The `smtpusername` setting is the username that PortSpec should connect to the
SMTP server as. Note that PortSpec uses TLS for the connection and Auth/Plain
as the login method.

#### smtppassword

The `smtppassword` setting is the password for the mail server. This password is
sent only if the server supports TLS, therefore it is encrypted during the
connection.

#### alertemail

The `alertemail` setting contains an e-mail address that will receive all alerts
generated by PortSpec. Currently this is a single e-mail address, but this will
soon be turned into a list to accept multiple recipients for alerts.

#### fromemail

The `fromemail` setting contains the e-mail address all alerts will be sent as.
This value will be sent to the mail server as well as be included in the `From`
header of the e-mail. You can currently only control the e-mail address, and
not the name. This is currently hardcoded as `PortSpec`.

## Logs

Currently PortSpec tries to produce a large amount of logs. This is done so you
can go back and check for information that may be useful at some point in the
future. Great care has been given to ensure no private information is being
logged, other than user provided values such as hosts and IP Addresses.

The framework utilized for logging supports two modes, one that will output
data as human readable format, which is common for other services, such as web
servers, mail servers, etc. and an other that will output all logs in JSON, to
be used directly with a log processing tool of your choice. A third format is
available that is used when PortSpec runs in a terminal, and also supports
colors for greater visibility.

By default the first option is used, but you can switch between them using
command line flags. The `-j` flag will cause PortSpec to output JSON. This
option is not configurable using the config file to ensure that all logs, such
as configuration file parsing errors, are in the same format. This hopefully
minimizes parsing errors.

PortSpec logs to the Standard Output (`stdout`), so redirection or a proper
daemon handling system is needed to save the logs to files. For example,
`systemd` will save `stdout` to `/var/log/syslog`.